Title: 2026.findings-acl.2050.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.findings-acl.2050.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 02:36:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 41216–41231 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics SAM-NER: Semantic Archetype Mediation for Zero-Shot Named Entity Recognition 

Ruichu Cai 1,2 , Juntao Gan 1, Miao Mai 3, Zhifeng Hao 1,4 , Boyan Xu 1*1School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology 

> 2

Peng Cheng Laboratory 3Nanfang Media Group(Nanfang Daily) 

> 4

College of Mathematics and Computer, Shantou University {cairuichu, yinghuo.gan}@gmail.com maim@nfmedia.com haozhifeng@stu.edu.cn hpakyim@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Zero-shot Named Entity Recognition (ZS-NER) remains brittle under domain and schema shifts, where unseen label definitions often mis-align with a large language model’s (LLM’s) intrinsic semantic organization. As a result, di-rectly mapping entity mentions to fine-grained target labels can induce systematic seman-tic drift, especially when target schemas are novel or semantically overlapping. We propose 

SAM-NER , a three-stage framework based on 

Semantic Archetype Mediation that stabilizes cross-domain transfer through an intermedi-ate, domain-invariant archetype space. SAM-NER: (i) performs Entity Discovery via coop-erative extraction and consensus-based denois-ing to obtain high-coverage, high-fidelity entity spans; (ii) conducts Abstract Mediation by pro-jecting entities into a compact set of universal semantic archetypes distilled from high-level ontological abstractions; and (iii) applies Se-mantic Calibration to resolve archetype-level predictions into target-domain types through constrained, definition-aligned inference with a frozen LLM. Experiments on the CrossNER benchmark show that SAM-NER consistently outperforms strong prior ZS-NER baselines in cross-domain settings. 

1 Introduction 

Zero-shot Named Entity Recognition (ZS-NER) aims to identify and type entities in unseen do-mains or under novel label taxonomies without target-domain supervision (Wei et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). With their strong general language understanding and broad world knowledge, large language models (LLMs) have become the domi-nant paradigm for tackling ZS-NER, enabling flex-ible reasoning over natural language descriptions of entity types and extraction rules. Most existing LLM-based ZS-NER approaches can be broadly 

> *

Corresponding author. Ulysses changed the style of literary writing in the 20th century  

> Text
> Schema
> Type Definitions
> Mediation Schema
> Schema: [“Poem", “Person", “Book"] Mediation Schema:[“Person", “Creative Work"]
> Text
> Schema
> Text
> Person: Ulysses
> Poem: Ulysses
> Without knowledge
> Person: Ulysses
> Mediation Type Definitions
> Creative Work : Ulysses
> Schema
> Book: Ulysses
> (a) Instruction -tuning
> (b) RAG
> (c) ours

Figure 1: Comparison of different ZS-NER methods 

categorized into two paradigms: (i) instruction-based structured extraction via natural language constraints, and (ii) retrieval-augmented inference (RAG) that incorporates external evidence during generation or verification. Instruction-based methods reformulate entity specifications and task constraints into prompts that guide LLMs to perform span extraction and type assignment. For example, Sainz et al. (2024) maps structured task specifications into natural-language annotation instructions, allowing LLMs to follow explicit extraction principles across di-verse domains. In contrast, retrieval-augmented approaches enhance inference by incorporating ex-ogenous knowledge sources; for instance, Kim et al. (2024) retrieves background evidence to support post-hoc verification and error correction, aiming to reduce hallucinations and improve reliability. Both paradigms have demonstrated promising perfor-mance under zero-shot and low-resource settings, highlighting the potential of LLMs as a unifying backbone for NER. However, existing LLM-based ZS-NER meth-ods exhibit fundamental limitations when applied to cross-domain settings with heterogeneous la-bel semantics. Instruction-based approaches im-

41216 plicitly assume that target-domain label definitions align well with the model’s intrinsic semantic or-ganization—an assumption that often fails when fine-grained, domain-specific schemas introduce systematic semantic drift. Meanwhile, retrieval-augmented methods are inherently constrained by the availability, coverage, and reliability of exter-nal knowledge sources, which are frequently sparse or incomplete in specialized vertical domains. As illustrated in Figure 1(a) and (b), both forms of mismatch—semantic misalignment between model representations and target definitions, and insuffi-ciencies in external knowledge—lead to character-istic failure modes in zero-shot extraction, resulting in distorted or erroneous entity predictions. These observations motivate the need for an intermedi-ate semantic abstraction that can stabilize cross-domain transfer without relying on domain-specific supervision or external knowledge. To address these challenges, we propose SAM-NER , a zero-shot NER framework based on the principle of Semantic Archetype Mediation . Our key insight is that while target-domain label tax-onomies are often volatile and domain-specific, the underlying semantic archetypes instantiated by en-tities remain largely invariant across domains. In-stead of forcing LLMs to directly map entity men-tions to narrow and unseen target labels, SAM-NER introduces an intermediate mediation layer that stabilizes semantic reasoning by decoupling semantic understanding from schema-specific label definitions. SAM-NER operates as a three-stage pipeline. (i) Entity Discovery via Cooperative Ex-traction identifies a high-recall yet high-fidelity set of candidate entity spans through dual-source extraction and consensus-based denoising; (ii) Ab-stract Mediation via Semantic Archetypes projects these candidates into a universal archetype space, establishing stable and domain-invariant seman-tic anchors; and (iii) Definition-Guided Semantic Calibration resolves archetype-level predictions into fine-grained target-domain types through con-strained, definition-aligned inference with a frozen LLM. As illustrated in Figure 1(c), this mediation-driven process enables reliable discrimination be-tween semantically adjacent target types even under severe schema shift. The main contributions of this work are summa-rized as follows: • We introduce Semantic Archetype Mediation ,a new paradigm for zero-shot NER that stabi-lizes cross-domain generalization by decou-pling semantic understanding from volatile label definitions. • We propose a cooperative entity discovery framework that combines a precision-oriented anchor extractor with a recall-oriented ex-plorer extractor, and introduce consensus-based denoising to reconcile their complemen-tary error profiles. • We develop a definition-guided semantic cali-bration mechanism that grounds archetype-level predictions into target-domain labels through constrained, definition-aligned rea-soning, eliminating reliance on external knowledge bases. • Extensive experiments on CrossNER demon-strate that SAM-NER achieves state-of-the-art performance, validating semantic archetype mediation as a more robust alternative to di-rect label mapping for out-of-domain general-ization. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Generative Models for NER 

Instruction tuning is a paradigm that was widely adopted in NER during the early stages of large lan-guage model development. Prior work injects task priors and entity type semantics into LLMs through natural language instructions, such as annotation guidelines, extraction rules, and type descriptions, which has been shown to effectively improve entity boundary detection and type discrimination, partic-ularly in zero-shot and low resource settings (Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2024; Keloth et al., 2024). To further enhance the stability of instruction rep-resentations, recent studies introduce more struc-tured formulations. Approaches such as Code4UIE (Guo et al., 2024) and KnowCoder (Li et al., 2024) encode extraction schemas and type constraints as executable code or structured class hierarchies, ex-plicitly modeling semantic relations among entity types while retaining the core instruction following paradigm. In addition, with the further development of large language models, agent-based methods have emerged as a significant direction in NER research. This approach decomposes NER into multiple inter-active agents and enhances robustness in zero-shot 41217 Stage 1 Entity Discovery via Cooperative Extraction 

> Stage 2 Abstract Mediation via Universal Semantic Archetypes
> Stage 3 Definition -Guided Semantic Calibration
> Taylor's Fearless includes the song Love Story.
> T[n] Schema

Anchor 

Extractor  

> Text x
> Extraction Prompt

Explorer 

Extractor         

> Love Story
> Taylor
> Fearless
> song
> Output 𝐸 𝑎𝑛𝑐
> Output 𝐸 exp
> CCR
> song
> Verification set Noise set
> song Failed 𝐸 𝑎𝑛𝑐
> Fearless
> 𝐸 𝑒𝑥𝑝
> ~𝐸 𝑒𝑥𝑝
> Denoising
> Taylor Love Story Fearless
> Fine -grained Types
> (domain -specific)
> Abstract Mediation
> (domain -agnostic)
> Semantic Archetypes Space(k=14)
> Cluster & Abstraction
> <ENT>Taylor </ENT> 's <ENT> Fearless
> </ENT> includes the song <ENT> Love Story.
> </ENT>
> Classification Prompt
> Person -Taylor
> Creative work -
> Love Story
> Creative work -
> Fearless
> Archetype
> Definitions
> Target Type
> Definitions
> T[n] Schema Text x
> Type Calibration Prompt

Type 

Calibrator 

> Person -Taylor
> Song -Love Story

Archetype 

Classifier  

> Output 𝐸 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙

Guided by the defi -

nition , the type of  

> {Fearless}

is  {Album} .Figure 2: The overall framework . In Stage 1, extracted entities are used to annotate sentences. In Stage 2, archetype mediation are assigned to the marked entities. In Stage 3, the mediation types are refined into target domain types based on type definitions. 

or low-resource scenarios through structured in-teractions, tool usage, or iterative improvements. Key mechanisms include: self-iteration/reflection, which involves reviewing and correcting predic-tions or pseudo-labels to refine entity boundaries and types (Wang et al., 2025; Tao et al., 2025); and networked retrieval, which utilizes an indepen-dent Knowledge Retrieval Agent to obtain external knowledge from Wikipedia to enrich contextual information (Mu et al., 2026). Despite their effectiveness, instruction tuning methods generally assume that LLM internal se-mantic representations are well aligned with target domain entity type semantics. This assumption often breaks down in out-of-domain or novel type scenarios, where semantic misalignment limits gen-eralization performance. In contrast, agent-based methods leverage multi-step collaboration among different agents to enhance the accuracy of rea-soning, with performance improvements primarily stemming from external coordination and multi-step collaboration. 

2.2 Entity Type Descriptions without External Knowledge 

In knowledge intensive Named Entity Recognition scenarios, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has been widely adopted to enhance entity recogni-tion and type discrimination. Such approaches typ-ically assist LLMs by retrieving similar annotated examples from demonstration pools or by incorpo-rating entity-related background knowledge from external knowledge bases during inference (Nandi and Agrawal, 2024; Liao et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025; Keloth et al., 2024). Although these meth-ods achieve substantial performance gains across multiple benchmarks, their effectiveness heavily depends on the quality and coverage of external knowledge resources, limiting their scalability to data-scarce domains. In the absence of external knowledge, recent studies have explored leveraging natural language descriptions—such as entity type definitions—to provide semantic constraints for NER (Sainz et al., 2024; Zamai et al., 2024; Cocchieri et al., 2025a,b). Instead of treating entity types as discrete symbolic labels, these methods convert them into human-readable forms, including type definitions, annota-tion guidelines, or labeling instructions, and incor-porate them as soft constraints during extraction and classification. This formulation enables LLMs to perform entity typing based on semantic under-standing, even without explicit domain knowledge. Nevertheless, these approaches implicitly rely on a stable alignment between target type semantics and the model’s intrinsic semantic space. Under 41218 domain shift or unseen label settings, directly rea-soning over target type definitions can introduce semantic mismatch, leading to type ambiguity or unstable predictions. This limitation motivates fur-ther investigation into how type semantics can be leveraged more robustly for out-of-domain NER without external knowledge. 

3 Methodology 

SAM-NER is a three-stage framework designed to mitigate semantic drift in zero-shot Named Entity Recognition through semantic archetype mediation .As illustrated in Figure 2, the framework follows a progressive mediation pipeline that transitions from entity span discovery to abstract semantic anchor-ing, and finally to definition-grounded target typ-ing. Specifically, (i) the Entity Discovery stage via Cooperative Extraction identifies a high-recall yet high-fidelity set of candidate entity spans through dual-source extraction and consensus-based denois-ing; (ii) the Abstract Mediation stage via Univer-sal Semantic Archetypes projects these candidates into a universal archetype space, establishing sta-ble and domain-invariant semantic anchors; and (iii) the Definition-Guided Semantic Calibration 

stage resolves archetype-level predictions into fine-grained target-domain types through constrained, definition-aligned inference. By decoupling entity discovery, semantic mediation, and target-domain grounding, SAM-NER provides a robust and inter-pretable solution for zero-shot NER under hetero-geneous label semantics. 

3.1 Entity Discovery via Cooperative Extraction 

This stage aims to construct a high-coverage yet high-fidelity set of type-agnostic entity span can-didates for subsequent semantic archetype medi-ation. We adopt a dual-source design to exploit complementary error profiles: a precision-oriented 

anchor extractor provides stable corroboration sig-nals, while a silver-supervised explorer extractor 

improves recall but may introduce spurious men-tions. We then perform consensus-based denoising to suppress silver-noise without sacrificing cover-age. 

Anchor Extractor. We instantiate the anchor extractor Extractor anc as a precision-oriented instruction-tuned model. Specifically, we use Llama3-8B-Instruct fine-tuned on high-quality IE instructions from IEPile (Gui et al., 2024), which exhibits strong boundary discrimination and sta-ble semantic behavior under domain shift. Given an input sentence xi and a target type set Ti, the anchor extractor outputs a set of candidate entity mentions: 

Ei 

> anc

= Extractor anc (xi, T i). (1) Each e ∈ Ei 

> anc

denotes an extracted entity span in 

xi.

Explorer Extractor. To increase candidate cov-erage and capture entities that may be missed by the anchor extractor, we introduce a recall-oriented explorer extractor Extractor exp trained with broad-spectrum silver supervision. We train 

Extractor exp using Pile-NER (Zhou et al., 2023) by converting its dialogue-style supervision into a standard instruction-following format. Given the same input (xi, T i), the explorer extractor produces an additional candidate set: 

Ei 

> exp

= Extractor exp (xi, T i). (2) In practice, Extractor exp tends to over-generate low-salience, word-level mentions (e.g., "data", "system", "user"). We attribute this behavior to noise in the silver-standard annotations of Pile-NER, where automated labeling may spuriously mark generic functional nouns as entities, partic-ularly under domain shift. Such spurious candi-dates introduce substantial variance and motivate an explicit denoising mechanism before archetype mediation. 

Collaborative Consensus Refinement. We intro-duce Collaborative Consensus Refinement (CCR) as a consensus-based denoising mechanism to re-fine the explorer candidates produced by the silver-supervised extractor. CCR leverages the anchor extractor as an independent semantic validator and selectively filters noise-prone candidates in 

Ei 

> exp

through cross-model consensus. The un-derlying intuition is that generic, non-referential spans are prone to appear in silver-supervised out-puts, whereas the instruction-tuned anchor extrac-tor provides a stronger semantic prior for validating whether a span constitutes a meaningful entity men-tion in context. Concretely, we identify a subset of explorer can-didates that are most prone to silver-noise arti-facts and aggregate them into a verification set 

V i 

> noise

⊆ Ei

> exp

. A candidate e ∈ V i 

> noise

is marked as 41219 noise only if it fails to obtain independent corrobo-ration from the anchor extractor: 

Di 

> noise

= { e ∈ V i 

> noise

| e / ∈ Ei 

> anc

}. (3) The denoised explorer candidate set is then ob-tained as: 

˜Ei 

> exp

= Ei 

> exp

\ Di

> noise

. (4) Finally, we construct the discovered entity set via a de-duplicated union: 

Ei 

> final

= Ei 

> anc

∪ ˜Ei

> exp

. (5) This consensus-driven refinement preserves the high-precision predictions of the anchor extractor while retaining the coverage benefits of the explorer extractor, yielding a high-fidelity candidate set for subsequent semantic archetype mediation. 

Algorithm 1: Collaborative Consensus Refine-ment (CCR)  

> 1:

Input: Eanc , E exp  

> 2:

Dnoise ← ∅ , ˜Ei 

> exp

← ∅  

> 3:

for eiexp ∈ Eexp do  

> 4:

len e ← len (split (eiexp ))  

> 5:

if len e = 1 & eiexp /∈ Eanc then  

> 6:

Dnoise ← Dnoise ∪ { eiexp } 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

for eiexp ∈ Eexp do  

> 10:

if eiexp /∈ Dnoise then  

> 11:

˜Ei 

> exp

← ˜Ei 

> exp

∪ { eiexp } 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Output: ˜Ei

> exp

3.2 Abstract Mediation via Universal Semantic Archetypes 

The core bottleneck in zero-shot Named Entity Recognition lies in the high variance and domain-specificity of target label semantics. To address this challenge, we introduce an in-termediate Abstract Mediation stage— Semantic Archetype Mediation —that bridges entity discovery and target-domain calibration. Our key hypothesis is that while fine-grained entity labels vary substan-tially across domains and annotation schemas, they can be projected into a compact and stable seman-tic space consisting of broad, invariant archetypes. By performing classification within this archetype space, we decouple semantic understanding from volatile label definitions and reduce the alignment pressure between the LLM’s intrinsic representa-tions and heterogeneous domain-specific schemas. 

Ontological Distillation and Archetype Map-ping. We construct the mediation space by consolidating heterogeneous NER schemas from IEPile (Gui et al., 2024), which integrates multiple information extraction benchmarks with instance-specific type sets. Let Dner denote the NER subset of IEPile. For each training instance i, let T i

> orig

denote its original fine-grained type schema, which may differ substantially across data sources. Guided by taxonomic design principles proposed by Yang et al. (2025), we distill a universal set of 14 semantic archetypes A (e.g., Person , Medicine )to serve as the shared mediation space for zero-shot NER. Rather than adopting an existing ontology verbatim, we construct an abstract type system ex-plicitly tailored for semantic mediation across het-erogeneous NER schemas. The choice of archetype granularity is empirically motivated and further an-alyzed in Section 6. The resulting archetypes are designed to satisfy several desiderata: (i) readability , ensuring that type names are interpretable to both humans and language models; (ii) unambiguity , minimizing se-mantic overlap between closely related categories; (iii) hierarchical coherence , aligning fine-grained types with their abstract parents; and (iv) flexibility ,allowing the taxonomy to accommodate diverse NER tasks and emerging entity types. We formalize schema consolidation via a deter-ministic projection function: 

M : Torig → A , (6) where Torig = ⋃ 

> i

T i 

> orig

denotes the union of fine-grained types observed in Dner . For each instance 

i, the corresponding abstract schema is obtained by projecting its original schema: 

Ai = M (T i

> orig

) ⊆ A . (7) The projection function M is constructed through a data-informed, principle-guided schema design process. Semantically related fine-grained labels are grouped under shared abstract parents according to their conceptual scope and hierarchi-cal relations, while enforcing the desiderata above. Importantly, M is deterministic and fixed through-out training and inference. For reproducibility, the 41220 complete type-to-archetype mapping is provided in Appendix B. Applying M to the original annotations resolves ontological overlaps and homogenizes the label space. To preserve the relationship between each entity mention and its sentential context, we em-ploy an entity-aware formatting strategy that marks mentions with <ENT> and </ENT> tags. The result-ing abstract training set is defined as: 

Dabs = {(Si

> tag

, Ai, Y i

> abs

)}|Dner | 

> i=1

, (8) where Si 

> tag

is the tagged sentence and Y i 

> abs

denotes the archetype-level annotations obtained by pro-jecting the original labels through M . This design allows the classifier to respect instance-specific schema constraints during training, while learning a unified and domain-invariant abstraction space. 

Abstract Archetype Classifier. We train an ab-stract archetype classifier Classif ier abs on Dabs 

to serve as the mediation module. During train-ing, the classifier is conditioned on the instance-specific abstract schema Ai, reflecting the multi-source setting where the candidate type set varies across examples. During inference, since the input consists only of entity-marked sentences without schema constraints, the classifier predicts over the full archetype space A:

yi 

> abs

= Classif ier abs (xi

> tag

, A), (9) where yi 

> abs

represents the predicted archetype as-signments for entities in the sentence. The col-lection Yabs = {yi

> abs

}ni=1 provides stable semantic anchors for the subsequent definition-guided cali-bration stage, enabling target-domain typing to be grounded in a pre-aligned and domain-invariant semantic framework. 

3.3 Definition-Guided Semantic Calibration 

To bridge the final gap between the abstract archetype space A and domain-specific tax-onomies, we introduce a Definition-Guided Seman-tic Calibration stage. Given the archetype predic-tions Yabs produced by the semantic archetype me-diation stage, this module resolves each archetype assignment into a fine-grained target-domain la-bel through constrained type inference . Unlike approaches that directly prompt LLMs to predict target labels, we leverage archetypes as semantic anchors and explicitly condition target-type reason-ing on the predicted yi

> abs

, thereby narrowing the inference space and mitigating semantic drift in zero-shot transfer. 

Axiomatic Definition Construction. To estab-lish clear and stable semantic boundaries for the archetype space, we associate each abstract archetype a ∈ A with a canonical semantic defini-tion. Let 

Dabs = {da | a ∈ A} (10) denote the set of abstract type definitions, where each da characterizes the essential semantic scope of archetype a. These definitions are synthesized via prompt-based distillation using a large language model (OpenAI, 2025) and are designed to be stylis-tically consistent and semantically exclusive. As a result, they serve as explicit semantic constraints that delineate the abstract mediation space without introducing domain-specific leakage. For a given target domain, let Ttgt denote its en-tity type set. We associate each target type t ∈ T tgt 

with a refined natural language definition and de-note the resulting definition set as: 

Dtgt = {dt | t ∈ T tgt }. (11) We apply minimal linguistic normalization to the original benchmark descriptions (e.g., CrossNER (Liu et al., 2021)) to remove syntactic redundan-cies and underspecified semantics while preserving their original intent. These refined target definitions constitute the axiomatic constraints for definition-guided calibration. 

Constrained Definition-Aligned Inference. We employ a frozen large language model as a cali-bration operator, denoted by Calibrator , to per-form definition-aligned type inference. For each extracted entity instance i, we are given its con-text sentence Si, its predicted abstract archetype 

yi 

> abs

∈ A , and the target-domain type definitions 

Dtgt . The calibration objective is to resolve the most compatible target type under the constraint imposed by the archetype prior: 

yi 

> tgt

= arg max 

> t∈T tgt

Align (dyi 

> abs

, d t | Si), (12) where dyi 

> abs

∈ D abs is the definition of the pre-dicted archetype, and Align (·) denotes a definition-alignment scoring function implicitly realized by the frozen LLM. This function evaluates the se-mantic entailment and compatibility between the archetype prior and candidate target definitions within the given context. 41221 By enforcing this abstract-to-target alignment constraint, the calibrator avoids unconstrained la-bel reasoning and instead grounds target-type selec-tion in a pre-stabilized semantic framework. This dual-level alignment enables robust discrimination between semantically adjacent target types, even when they are unseen during training. Finally, the calibrated predictions across all ex-tracted entities are aggregated as: 

Ytgt = {yi

> tgt

}Ni=1 , (13) where N is the number of extracted entity instances. This calibrated entity set constitutes the final output of SAM-NER .

4 Experimental Settings 

4.1 Datasets Training Sets. In our experiments, we use Pile-NER (Zhou et al., 2023) and IEPile (Gui et al., 2024) as training datasets. Pile-NER covers ap-proximately 13K entity types and contains around 240K entity instances, exhibiting a highly diverse distribution of entity types. IEPile is an instruction-tuning dataset for information extraction on a large scale that integrates 33 widely used IE benchmarks, in this work, we use only its Named Entity Recog-nition subset. 

Benchmark. We adopt CrossNER (Liu et al., 2021) as the evaluation benchmark to assess the effectiveness of the proposed approach on out-of-domain zero-shot Named Entity Recognition. CrossNER spans multiple domains, including Arti-ficial Intelligence, Literature, Music, Politics, and Science, enabling systematic evaluation of model generalization across diverse domains. 

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 

We use micro-F1, a widely adopted metric in Named Entity Recognition, as the evaluation mea-sure. 

4.3 Compared Baselines 

We select the following representative zero-shot and out-of-domain Named Entity Recognition methods as baselines for comparison: • InstructUIE (Wang et al., 2023) InstructUIE jointly instruction tuning multiple IE tasks under a unified framework. • UniNER (Zhou et al., 2023) UniNER com-bines target distillation with instruction tuning for cross-task generalization. • IEPile (Gui et al., 2024) This method con-structs a large data set to train the information extraction ability of the model. • GoLLIE (Sainz et al., 2024) GoLLIE trains LLMs with structured annotation guidelines for type-driven extraction. • KnowCoder (Li et al., 2024) KnowCoder encodes structured constraints as executable code to enhance semantic understanding. • GLiNER (Zaratiana et al., 2024) alightweight general-purpose named en-tity recognition model based on bidirectional Transformer, which performs exceptionally well in resource-constrained scenarios. • IRRA (Cai et al., 2025) IRRA applies re-trieval augmented generation to refine entity typing. Since the optimal settings introduce additional knowledge, but the Guidelines set-tings are similar to ours, we chose to use the Guidelines settings for comparison. • GUIDEX (Fuente et al., 2025) GUIDEX per-forms data synthesis guided by the schema and infers entities using type definitions. For all baselines, we report the best results under the zero-shot and out-of-domain settings as docu-mented in the original papers. 

4.4 Backbones & Implementation 

In all experiments, we consistently used Llama3-8B-Instruct as the backbone model. Additionally, to validate the generalization ability of the pro-posed method across different model families, we further introduced Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct as a sup-plementary backbone model. It should be noted that since the Anchor Extractor utilizes the Llama3-8B LoRA weights provided by IEPile(Gui et al., 2024), Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct is used only as the base model for the Explorer Extractor, Archetype Classifier, and Type Calibrator in this setup. Both the extractors and the classifier are trained via su-pervised instruction tuning, with fine-tuning that updates only a small subset of parameters using LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). All models are trained on three NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU using the Lla-maFactory framework (Zheng et al., 2024). 41222 Method Params Backbone AI Literature Music Politics Science Avg.                                                                                 

> InstructUIE (2023) 11B Flan-T5 49.0 42.7 53.2 48.1 49.2 48.4 UniNER (2023) 13B LLaMA 54.2 60.9 64.5 61.4 63.5 60.9 IEPile-Llama3-8B (2024) 8B Llama3 50.2 43.3 53.7 57.0 50.4 50.9 GoLLIE (2024) 34B CodeLLaMA 61.6 59.1 68.4 60.2 56.3 61.1 KnowCoder (2024) 7B LLaMA2 60.3 61.1 70.0 72.2 59.1 64.5 GLiNER-Large (2024) 0.3B DeBERTa-v3 57.2 64.4 69.6 72.6 62.6 65.3 IRRA-Guidelines (2025) 8B LLaMA3 53.2 57.7 64.7 66.2 64.1 61.2 GUIDEX (2025) 8B LLaMA3.1 62.4 63.8 67.9 69.6 64.6 65.7
> SAM-NER (Qwen2.5-7B) 7B Qwen2.5 57.9 64.1 69.3 66.7 62.1 64.3
> SAM-NER (Llama3-8B) 8B LLaMA3 58.2 68.7 71.2 68.2 65.1 66.3

Table 1: The micro-F1 scores on zero-shot cross-domain setting. Except for IRRA, all baseline scores are directly taken from the results reported in the original papers under their optimal settings. We used the scores generated by IRRA under the Guidelines settings for comparison. 

5 Results 

Table 1 presents a comparison between our SAM-NER and several state-of-the-art zero-shot NER systems. When using Llama3-8B as the backbone, our method achieved an average F1 score of 66.3 on the CrossNER, outperforming all comparison methods in the benchmark. Specifically, SAM-NER achieved the best performance in the litera-ture, music, and science domains, with a 4.3-point increase in F1 score over the second-best method in the literature domain. When using Qwen2.5-7B as the backbone, the model’s average F1 score also approached the runner-up’s level, further demon-strating the effectiveness of the proposed abstract mediation mechanism in stabilizing cross-domain transfer. We observe relatively lower performance in the AI; However, UniNER and IEPile-Llama3-8B, trained on the same data as our Cooperative ex-tractor, exhibit similar trends, suggesting that this problem may stem from an intrinsic bias in the training data. GLiNER’s performance advantages in the political domain may stem from the stability of its entity structure and clear semantic bound-aries, characteristics that align highly effectively with its entity span-type semantic matching mecha-nism. When the semantic distance between target domain types and the abstract mediation layer is insufficient, the prototype’s mediating role may become less effective. 

6 Analysis 

Contribution of Different Components. To demonstrate the contributions of the entity discov-ery via cooperative extraction and definition-guided semantic calibration stages to SAM-NER under the ZS-NER setting, we conducted further analysis. During the entity discovery via cooperative extrac-tion phase, we removed the anchor extractor ( w/o anc. ) and the explorer extractor ( w/o exp. ) respec-tively. We removed the definition-guided semantic calibration stage ( w/o cali. ) and retrained the clas-sification model on data with unmapped abstract Archetypes to adapt it for predicting target entity types.                   

> Dataset w/o exp. w/o anc. w/o cali.
> AI 53.0 -5.2 54.1 -4.1 48.5 -9.7
> Literature 64.6 -4.1 61.9 -6.8 56.1 -12.6
> Music 65.3 -5.9 66.1 -5.1 58.6 -12.6
> Politics 63.6 -4.6 61.9 -6.3 63.7 -4.5
> Science 61.4 -3.7 58.8 -6.3 54.1 -11

Table 2: Micro-F1 Values for Different Components in SAM-NER 

The results are shown in Table 2. Can be ob-served that: (1) Removing either extractor (w/o anc. or w/o exp.) consistently leads to performance degradation. This is mainly because the two extrac-tors are trained on different data distributions and supervision signals, resulting in divergent entity boundary predictions. (2) The performance drops substantially under the w/o cali. setting, which highlights the critical role of the intermediate se-mantics in out-of-domain generalization. Due to the mismatch between the intrinsic semantic rep-resentations of the language model and the target-domain type definitions, the model struggles to di-rectly interpret target type descriptions—especially for novel types that never appear in the training data—thereby causing classification errors. 

Contribution of Collaborative Consensus Re-finement. Drawing on the results in Table 3 and Figure 3, the Collaborative Consensus Refinement 41223 Method AI Literature Music Politics Science 

w/o CCR 50.8 65.3 67.2 65.5 60.9 w/ CCR 58.2 68.7 71.2 68.2 65.1 

Table 3: Impact of the Collaborative Consensus Refine-ment(CCR) strategy on performance. AI Literature Music Politics Science 

> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> Performance Score
> Precision (w/o CCR)
> Precision (w/ CCR)
> Recall (w/o CCR)
> Recall (w/ CCR)

Figure 3: Impact of CCR strategy on precision and Recall in different domains 

strategy effectively mitigates the spurious men-tion activations typical of explorer extractor trained on silver-standard data, which often misidentify generic functional terms as entity mentions. As il-lustrated in Table 3, the integration of CCR yields consistent F1 gains across all domains, highlighted by a 7.4-point increase in the AI domain. Met-rics in Figure 3 further confirm that this improve-ment stems from a significant optimization in pre-cision, successfully rectifying the precision-recall imbalance of the base extractor. By leveraging dual-model consensus as a semantic filter, CCR prunes generic lexical noise while preserving the coverage of long-tail entities. Our collaborative mechanism effectively reconciles the extensive dis-covery capabilities of silver-data models with the high-precision reasoning of models trained on high-quality instructions. 

Why 14 Semantic Archetypes? To derive a uni-versal abstract mediation space, we performed se-mantic clustering on entity patterns distilled from the IEPile corpus. In determining the optimal clus-ter number k, we adhered to the principle of on-tological parsimony, seeking a balance between semantic granularity and cross-domain stability. As illustrated in Figure 4(a), the Silhouette Score achieves a prominent local peak at k = 14 .While higher numerical scores appear at k = 21 

and k = 24 , the Gap Statistic reveals that the struc-tural gains from increasing k exhibit diminishing marginal returns beyond 14. Furthermore, the ob-served drop in the Gap Statistic at k = 15 sig-nals a potential instability in semantic boundaries at that specific dimensionality. Although Figure 4(b) demonstrates that k = 24 can capture hyper-specific semantic nuances (e.g., "SUV" or "MPV"), such high-specificity clusters are prone to coupling with domain-specific noise in zero-shot scenarios, thereby compromising the transferability of the me-diation space. Consequently, we set k = 14 as it represents the optimal trade-off between intra-cluster cohesion and inter-cluster separability, es-tablishing a robust semantic space that effectively resists domain shift. 0 5 10 15 20 25       

> Number of Clusters (k)
> 0.09
> 0.10
> 0.11
> 0.12
> 0.13
> 0.14
> Silhouette Score
> k=14 k=21 k=24
> (a) Determination of Optimal k(b) k= 24 Semantic Projection
> C0
> C1
> C2
> C3
> C4
> C5
> C6
> C7
> C8
> C9
> C10
> C11
> C12
> C13
> C14
> C15
> C16
> C17
> C18
> C19
> C20
> C21
> C22
> C23
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 1.1
> 1.2
> Gap Statistic

Figure 4: The Cluster Analysis. The left figure (a) shows the scores of Silhouette and Gap at different k values. The right figure (b) presents the clustering results when 

k = 24 .

7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented SAM-NER , a three-stage framework that mitigates semantic drift in zero-shot NER through Semantic Archetype Me-diation . By decoupling span discovery from fine-grained target typing, SAM-NER stabilizes cross-domain transfer under heterogeneous label seman-tics. Concretely, we first perform Entity Discovery 

via cooperative extraction and consensus-based de-noising to obtain a high-fidelity candidate set, then conduct Abstract Mediation by projecting candi-dates into a universal semantic archetype space to provide domain-invariant anchors, and finally apply 

Definition-Guided Calibration to ground archetype-level predictions into target-domain types through constrained, definition-aligned inference. Experi-ments on CrossNER demonstrate that SAM-NER consistently outperforms strong prior zero-shot NER baselines in cross-domain settings, with particularly pronounced gains in domains where schema-specific label semantics amplify misalign-ment. Overall, our findings highlight semantic archetype mediation as an effective and inter-pretable strategy for improving domain-invariant generalization in zero-shot NER. 41224 Limitations 

Despite its strong empirical performance, SAM-NER has two main limitations that warrant further investigation: (1) Taxonomic Bias and Bounded Universality. SAM-NER relies on a compact set of 14 semantic archetypes distilled from IEPile, which does not constitute a theoretically exhaustive ontol-ogy. As a result, the universality of the archetype space is bounded by the coverage and granular-ity of the distillation source. In highly specialized domains, limited semantic resolution may lead to 

coarse-mapping errors, where domain-specific nu-ances are absorbed into overly broad archetypes, reducing precision under fine-grained or atypical target taxonomies. (2) Dependence on Definition Discriminability. The fidelity of definition-guided calibration depends on the linguistic discriminabil-ity of target type definitions. When definitions are underspecified, highly overlapping, or inconsis-tent across labels, the constrained alignment pro-cess becomes sensitive to description quality and may produce unstable type assignments. There-fore, while semantic archetype mediation mitigates semantic drift at the schema level, the final predic-tions remain partly contingent on the clarity and separability of human-authored label definitions. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported in part by Na-tional Science and Technology Major Project (2021ZD0111502), Natural Science Foundation of China (U24A20233, 62406078, 62476163), the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023B1515120020), CCF-DiDi GAIA Collaborative Research Funds (CCF-DiDi GAIA 202521), and Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)(GML-KF-24-23). 

References 

Fan Bai, Junmo Kang, Gabriel Stanovsky, Dayne Fre-itag, Mark Dredze, and Alan Ritter. 2024. Schema-driven information extraction from heterogeneous tables. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10252– 10273. Ruichu Cai, Junhao Lu, Zhongjie Chen, Boyan Xu, and Zhifeng Hao. 2025. Handling missing entities in zero-shot named entity recognition: Integrated re-call and retrieval augmentation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10790–10802. Alessio Cocchieri, Giacomo Frisoni, Marcos Martínez Galindo, Gianluca Moro, Giuseppe Tagliavini, and Francesco Candoli. 2025a. Openbioner: Lightweight open-domain biomedical named entity recognition through entity type description. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 818–837. Alessio Cocchieri, Marcos Martínez Galindo, Gia-como Frisoni, Gianluca Moro, Claudio Sartori, and Giuseppe Tagliavini. 2025b. Zeroner: Fueling zero-shot named entity recognition via entity type descrip-tions. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 15594–15616. Neil De La Fuente, Oscar Sainz, Iker García-Ferrero, and Eneko Agirre. 2025. GUIDEX: Guided synthetic data generation for zero-shot information extraction. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 24248–24262, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Honghao Gui, Lin Yuan, Hongbin Ye, Ningyu Zhang, Mengshu Sun, Lei Liang, and Huajun Chen. 2024. IEPile: Unearthing large scale schema-conditioned information extraction corpus. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 127–146, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yucan Guo, Zixuan Li, Xiaolong Jin, Yantao Liu, Yu-tao Zeng, Wenxuan Liu, Xiang Li, Pan Yang, Long Bai, Jiafeng Guo, and 1 others. 2024. Retrieval-augmented code generation for universal information extraction. In CCF International Conference on Nat-ural Language Processing and Chinese Computing ,pages 30–42. Springer. Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, and 1 others. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3. Vipina K Keloth, Yan Hu, Qianqian Xie, Xueqing Peng, Yan Wang, Andrew Zheng, Melih Selek, Kalpana Raja, Chih Hsuan Wei, Qiao Jin, and 1 others. 2024. Advancing entity recognition in biomedicine via in-struction tuning of large language models. Bioinfor-matics , 40(4):btae163. Seoyeon Kim, Kwangwook Seo, Hyungjoo Chae, Jinyoung Yeo, and Dongha Lee. 2024. Ver-ifiNER: Verification-augmented NER via knowledge-grounded reasoning with large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2441–2461, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. 41225 Zixuan Li, Yutao Zeng, Yuxin Zuo, Weicheng Ren, Wenxuan Liu, Miao Su, Yucan Guo, Yantao Liu, Lix-iang Lixiang, Zhilei Hu, and 1 others. 2024. Know-coder: Coding structured knowledge into llms for uni-versal information extraction. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8758–8779. Xincheng Liao, Junwen Duan, Yixi Huang, and Jianxin Wang. 2025. Ruie: Retrieval-based unified infor-mation extraction using large language model. In 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 9640–9655. Zihan Liu, Yan Xu, Tiezheng Yu, Wenliang Dai, Zi-wei Ji, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2021. Crossner: Evaluating cross-domain named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol-ume 35, pages 13452–13460. Wenxuan Mu, Jinzhong Ning, Di Zhao, and Yijia Zhang. 2026. A multi-agent llm framework for multi-domain low-resource in-context ner via knowledge retrieval, disambiguation and reflective analysis. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 40, pages 32528–32536. Subhadip Nandi and Neeraj Agrawal. 2024. Improving few-shot cross-domain named entity recognition by instruction tuning a word-embedding based retrieval augmented large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00451 .OpenAI. 2025. Chatgpt. https://www.openai.com/ chatgpt . Accessed: 2025-06-23. Oscar Sainz, Iker García-Ferrero, Rodrigo Agerri, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, German Rigau, and Eneko Agirre. 2024. GoLLIE: Annotation guidelines im-prove zero-shot information-extraction. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Xinli Tao, Xin Dong, and Xuezhong Zhou. 2025. Oema: Ontology-enhanced multi-agent collaboration frame-work for zero-shot clinical named entity recognition. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.15211 .Xiao Wang, Weikang Zhou, Can Zu, Han Xia, Tianze Chen, Yuansen Zhang, Rui Zheng, Junjie Ye, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, and 1 others. 2023. Instructuie: Multi-task instruction tuning for unified information extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08085 .Zihan Wang, Ziqi Zhao, Yougang Lyu, Zhumin Chen, Maarten de Rijke, and Zhaochun Ren. 2025. A coop-erative multi-agent framework for zero-shot named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 , WWW ’25, page 4183–4195, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Xiang Wei, Xingyu Cui, Ning Cheng, Xiaobin Wang, Xin Zhang, Shen Huang, Pengjun Xie, Jinan Xu, Yufeng Chen, Meishan Zhang, Yong Jiang, and Wenjuan Han. 2024. Chatie: Zero-shot informa-tion extraction via chatting with chatgpt. Preprint ,arXiv:2302.10205. Tingyu Xie, Qi Li, Yan Zhang, Zuozhu Liu, and Hong-wei Wang. 2024. Self-improving for zero-shot named entity recognition with large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 583–593, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yuming Yang, Wantong Zhao, Caishuang Huang, Jun-jie Ye, Xiao Wang, Huiyuan Zheng, Yang Nan, Yu-ran Wang, Xueying Xu, Kaixin Huang, and 1 others. 2025. Beyond boundaries: Learning a universal en-tity taxonomy across datasets and languages for open named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguis-tics , pages 10902–10923. Andrew Zamai, Andrea Zugarini, Leonardo Rigutini, Marco Ernandes, and Marco Maggini. 2024. Show less, instruct more: Enriching prompts with defini-tions and guidelines for zero-shot ner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01272 .Urchade Zaratiana, Nadi Tomeh, Pierre Holat, and Thierry Charnois. 2024. GLiNER: Generalist model for named entity recognition using bidirectional trans-former. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5364–5376, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yan-han Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi Feng, and Yongqiang Ma. 2024. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13372 .Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Yu Gu, Muhao Chen, and Hoifung Poon. 2023. Universalner: Targeted dis-tillation from large language models for open named entity recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03279 .41226 A Prompts 

The full set of prompts used in SAM-NER is illus-trated in Figures 5–8. These prompts decompose the NER process into four progressive stages: an-chor extraction, entity exploration, archetype clas-sification, and type calibration. 

B Detailed mapping relationship in IEPile and definition of archetype 

Following the empirical determination of k=14 , we conducted a semantic consolidation of labels from the IEPile corpus to derive 14 abstract types. The systematic projection from fine-grained entity cate-gories to these universal archetypes is summarized in Table 4. And the detailed definition of the pro-totype is shown in Table 5 

C Complexity Analysis of SAM-NER 

To evaluate the efficiency of SAM-NER, we re-ported the time cost and memory consumption for different module combinations. Note that all exper-iments were conducted on the NVIDIA A800 GPU. To objectively reflect SAM-NER’s raw computa-tional overhead, we used the Llama-Factory frame-work’s default inference pipeline without FlashAt-tention, quantization, or any third-party accelera-tion engines, in order to provide a baseline perfor-mance reference. The results are presented in Table 6. 

D Hyperparameter Settings for SAM-NER 

The hyperparameters of SAM-NER are presented in Table 7. 41227 Prompt 1: Anchor Extractor Prompt 

{

"instruction": "Given a passage and a schema, your task is to extract all named entities that conform to the 

schema type. ", 

"Schema": [List of entity types], 

"Passage": "The input sentence string" 

}Figure 5: Anchor Extractor Prompt. Guiding the model to identify and extract entities from text following predefined extraction schema. Prompt 2: Explorer Extractor Prompt 

{

"instruction": "Please extract entities that match the schema definition from the input. Return an empty list if 

the entity type does not exist. Please respond in the format of a JSON string." , 

"Schema": [List of entity types], 

"Input": "The input sentence string" 

}

Figure 6: Explorer Extractor Prompt. Guiding the model to identify and extract entities from text following predefined extraction schema. Prompt 3: Archetype Classifier Prompt 

{

"instruction": "Your task is to classify each entity marked with <ENT></ENT> without omission and strictly 

select the most appropriate and unique entity type from the given schema based on the sentence 

semantics." , 

"Schema": [List of entity types], 

"Sentence": "The input sentence string" 

}

Figure 7: Archetype Classifier Prompt. Guiding the model to assign semantically broad types to annotated entities in the input text based on predefined abstract schema. 41228 Prompt 4: Type Calibrator Prompt 

# Instruction 

> Based on the given information, you need to strictly select the appropriate target domain type from the `Candidate Types`
> for each named entity of the `Initial Output`.

# Information 

Text: {The input sentence string} 

Initial Output: {The output of entity classifier} 

Candidate Types: [List of target domain entity types] 

Abstract Types Definition: {The definition of abstract types} 

Target Types Definition: {The definition of target types} 

# Rules 

Guidance information needed when correcting entity types. 

# Output Format 

[{ 

"entity name": "corrected type" 

}] Figure 8: Type Calibrator Prompt. Guiding the model to calibrate the abstract types assigned to entities to target-domain types based on both semantically broad type definitions and target-domain semantic type definitions. 

Abstract Type Fine-grained Entity Types Person actor, character, director, mythical figure, person 

Organization organization, media 

Location Amenity, Location, location, exact location, geographical phenomenon, geographical social political, facility, road, river, area 

Biology animal, plant, biology 

Medicine Anatomy, DNA, RNA, GENE, protein, cell line, cell type, disease, Disease, biomedical, medicine 

Food Cuisine, Dish, food, Restaurant Name, review 

Vehicle 

vehicle, vehicle model, vehicle range, vehicle type, vehicle velocity, brand of vehicle, color of vehicle, orientation of vehicle, position of vehicle, estate car, SUV, MPV, hatchback, roadster, sports car, sedan, coupe, trailer, van, truck, motorcycle, vintage car, bus 

Creative_Work song, work of art, title, movie, genre, creative_work 

Event event, plot 

Artifact instrument, product, artifact 

Computer_Science 

application, enabling technology, concept or principle, process characterization, process parameter, machine or equipment, engineering feature, machanical property, manufacturing process, manufacturing standard, computer_science 

Political law, national religious political, political 

Science astronomical object, language, material, Chemical, science 

Misc misc, else 

Table 4: The detailed mapping relationship between abstract type and fine-grained entity type in IEPile. 41229 Archetype Archetype Definition Person Entities representing specific individuals identified by their proper names, including real people, fictional characters, nicknames, and aliases. 

Organization 

Entities representing structured groups of people working together for a common purpose, including corporations, government agencies, NGOs, musical bands, political parties, and educational institutions. 

Location Entities representing spatial or geographic regions, including countries, cities, administra-tive divisions, physical facilities, landmarks, and public spaces. 

Biology Entities related to living organisms and taxonomy, including animal and plant species, families, and general biological classifications. 

Medicine Entities related to healthcare and biomedical sciences, including diseases, drugs, medical procedures, anatomical structures, physiological processes, and clinical concepts. 

Food Entities related to consumables, including ingredients, prepared dishes, beverages, and culinary concepts. 

Vehicle Entities representing manufactured devices designed for transportation, including cars, aircraft, ships, spacecraft, and their specific models or classes. 

Creative_Work Entities representing distinct artistic or intellectual creations, such as books, songs, movies, video games, software titles, and media franchises. 

Event Entities representing specific occurrences or organized activities happening at a specific time and place, including festivals, wars, sports matches, conferences, and natural disasters. 

Artifact Entities representing man-made objects with specific functions, including tools, instru-ments, gadgets, weapons, and consumer goods. 

Computer_Science Entities related to computing and technology, including programming languages, algo-rithms, software architectures, technical protocols, digital metrics, and IT terminology. 

Political Entities related to governance, social structures, and ideologies, including laws, treaties, policies, religious groups, ethnicities, and sociopolitical systems. 

Science Entities related to scientific disciplines and natural phenomena, including academic fields, chemical elements, compounds, celestial bodies, and scientific theories. 

Misc Entities that cannot be clearly classified into the specific categories above, serving as a catch-all for other named entities. 

Table 5: The detailed definition of archetype. 

Method Time Cost Memory Consumption Avg. score 

w/o exp. 6486 1GPU × 29.53GB 61.6 w/o anc. 6507 1GPU × 29.53GB 60.6 w/o cali. 2883 1GPU × 17.78GB 56.2 w/ all 7247 1GPU × 29.53GB 66.3 

Table 6: Complexity Analysis of SAM-NER on CrossNER. The time unit is seconds. "w/o exp." refers to without employing explorer extractor."w/o anc." refers to without using anchor extractor."w/o cali." refers to without employing definition-guided semantic calibration stage. "w/ all" refers to using all components and stages. 41230 Hyperparameter Explorer Extractor Archetype Classifier 

loRA_rank(r) 8 8loRA_alpha( α) 16 16 cutoff_len 1024 1024 per_device_train_batch_size 2 2gradient_accumulation_steps 8 8learning_rate 2.0e-5 3.0e-5 num_train_epochs 3.0 3.0 lr_scheduler_type cosine cosine warmup_ratio 0.05 0.05 dtype bf16 bf16 

Table 7: Hyperparameter Settings of SAM-NER 41231